# Wayfaring Stranger

“I was born from the ribs of a concrete beast / with no faith, but at least I have these / convictions to show / for nights I wasted / alone”. I penned these lyrics in December 2015. Listening now to my words then, confirms, that long before I ever believed, I was wrestling with the angel of God. More accurately: long before I ever called God’s name, he was calling mine.

January 2015. In all the ways that surrounding culture measured success, I should have been happy. One report card said “graduate-level writing”; another said “amongst the best papers in twenty years of teaching”. I graduated with distinction, honors, class of 1970 award etc etc etc. Commencement: 66 world beaters march in suits and skirts. One by one they pose with their diploma, then approach the Bell, which blindingly reflects the afternoon sun. The speaker says "Michael Roffo. With distinction." I march forward, head high, pose for the picture... ring the bell. Then they say the next name. And so on... I worked so much that I didn't have a single intentional relationship from high school. Some years later I would come to tears over the loneliness in a Thai restaurant: "Michael Roffo. With distinction." Ring, ring, ring. "If this is what it was all for, I count it all as loss.” 

Spring 2015. I'm just back from Nashville, where I passed an audition to be a guitar major at Belmont University. On report cards my teachers distinguish "pre-Nashville Mike" from "post-Nashville Mike". I stop doing homework. I start bringing my guitar to school. I stay up all night writing. I start a band. In our senior yearbook I announce that one day I will share the stage with "my heroes on CD and tape". Due to sleep deprivation, I total my grandmother's car. In one song I ponder God’s role in my sudden creative impulse: “God turned out all my lights to find my song…” How true that would become!

Fall 2015. I have zero interest in further studying, but since that isn't culturally acceptable, I enroll at Belmont University to study music in Nashville. In practice, I use a “music major” for a bit of legitimacy, community, and dining hall access while I continue skipping class to write and rehearse. It's the dreamy opposite of rigid prep school: I'm in two bands. I hear live music every night. For the first time, I have community. I have friends who are like me; I have girlfriends, plural. I'm borderline popular. I feel like I am finally getting to be a kid. It's a dream. This happens to be a Christian school. In the dining hall some guy invites himself to my table and shares the gospel for a lot longer than the five minutes he asked for. I tell him: I’m not opposed to God; I’m just uninterested. I successfully register for zero Bible-related classes for my entire freshman year. I’m a bratty emo kid with tangled hair and torn clothes. My roommate is a wholesome home-grown Jesus-lovin’ country singer from Kentucky. He gives me a Bible for Christmas. I find this hilarious. I joke about it with my friends. I don’t take God’s Word out of the plastic for two years.

November 2016. I'm sweating out my like 200th song in my closet-sized bedroom on the 4th floor of this ancient Boston brownstone, which costs me a full paycheck per month. The background: horns honking, jackhammers rattling, and people shouting. My EP just dropped. "Dude this is sick!" No one can tell it was recorded in a bedroom. I audition a bassist. We one play one show in this crowded dingy art gallery on Mass Ave. "This is the dream,” I’m thinking. “This is the dream.” And the more I say it, the less it feels like the dream. I have glory. Some younger musicians say they look up to me — And I think, “I’m not so sure you want to be me.” Because I have no peace about the problems that are inspiring these songs. No, I am singing myself into cycles of sickness that I should be seeking passage through. Not with a bang, but with a whimper, my world of musical salvation ends.

January 2017. I start reading. Existentialism, Zen philosophy, secular psychology, anything that contributes a shred of an answer. I even become open-minded to reading religious texts, for practical wisdom. I accumulate moral knowledge, some of it even from the Bible. I am deeply impacted by the Sermon on the Mount: “So whatever you wish that others would do unto you, do unto them, for this is the Law and the Prophets.” “Beware of practicing your righteousness before others, in order to be seen by them…” “Do not be anxious about tomorrow, for tomorrow will be anxious for itself. Sufficient for the day is its own trouble.” “If you forgive others, your heavenly Father will also forgive you, but if you do not forgive others, neither will your Father forgive you.” “You have heard it said that you should love your neighbor and hate your enemies, but I say to you, Love your enemies and pray for those who persecute you”.

January 2018. In a UMass dining hall I meet Evan Risas who brings me to InterVarsity’s Mens Bible Study, where I meet Elias and Ben. They are as intentional about healing broken relationships as I am about being good at stuff. I ask, can’t I just simply study scripture intellectually and apply its practical wisdom to my life, avoiding all that spiritual stuff, that prayer stuff, and especially, that Lord stuff? But as the apostle Paul put it, “I have the desire to do what is right, but not the ability to carry it out…” There is a war inside of me, because no matter how much I learn about moral living, no matter how I admire the teachings of Christ, I keep on doing things that I know are wrong! Helpless! “Who will deliver me from this body of death?” 

May 2018. I attend MercyHouse and walk out of the sermon. Elias runs down the sidewalk after me. I may have been chasing after God. But how much more would my heart be changed if all this time, it was the Good Lord who was chasing me?

December 2018. The season's first flurries are spinning through downtown Northampton in little whirlwinds. I can see my breath. I'm with my a capella group, Noteorious (#UMassNoteorious), singing on the sidewalk for a holiday charity. Someone comes up, says we sound good, and asks if we want to perform at their church. When? Right now. Where? Across the street. Now I'm attending a Christmas service and hearing the gospel. Lawyers, tradespeople, and the homeless, are gathered here, as Christ said: "come to me, all who are heavy-laden, for I will give you rest.” And indeed, the heavy-laden were saying the Lord’s Prayer. As we begin our song, eyes of every color watch, dreamrapt. Heads are bobbing and the air is heavy with the Spirit: "I am a poor, wayfaring stranger. Traveling through this world alone. There's no sickness, toil, or danger. In that bright land to which I go.” Suddenly my heart is softened to this word, for what sickness and toil surrounds us! Might there be such a bright land to which we go? I watch the same revelation in the faces of the congregation. Our voices build to the chorus: “I'm going there to see my mother. I'm going there, no more to roam. I'm only going over Jordan. I'm only going over home.” In the tenor section, I feel… something… move through me. I can’t hold it inside. I am weeping for joy. Overflowing with gratitude. When the song is over I grab our singer by the shoulders with tears in my eyes saying “Did you feel it? Did you feel it?” If a song this soul-shattering and life-giving exists, its subject must also exist. What is more convincing than “Wayfaring Stranger?” or “Amazing Grace”? Through my own moral power I could never love my enemies as Christ does; but because he is the vine of life and the water that quenches, despite my stubborn insistence on my own way, he pursued me and through music, He captured my fitful heart and my wandering soul, that all the peace I could not live up to, he might freely give.

This year someone who looked homeless asked me to buy him a dinner at a UMass dining hall. I did. I asked his name, and invited him to our table. He muttered “I’ll be around” and ran away. The ingratitude threw me into thirty minutes of petty anger. How was it that Jesus, on the other hand, as he was being brutally executed, said “Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do!”? I prayed. I asked about my attitude towards this poor homeless man. What if he, as well, knows not what he does? Do any of us? I prayed for him, wherever he was. I started feeling bad, for someone who had either conned me or snubbed me or both. By the grace of God was I actually loving my enemy? Only God knows. In trying to be wise, I became a fool. In trying to save my own life, I lost it. In insisting on my own dream, I nearly missed out on God’s dream for my life.

Father, all kingdoms are yours. All power is yours. All glory is yours. I am asking you, Jesus, to be the Lord of my life, for forever and ever. Yo. Amen.
